>> Hello.
I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill,
and I want to welcome you
to "Living in Balance."
We're going to be
sharing with you a story
today of an American
doctor who was called back
to India by his guru.
The purpose of it
was an initiation.
An amazing story.
Come join us.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]
Dr. Donald Schnell
is with us today,
and I'd like to welcome you.
>> Thank you, Georgia.
>> It's wonderful
to have you here,
and you're going to tell
us a story that is amazing,
and it's amazing, and that's
a word that I had to use,
because you took a journey of
adventure and enlightenment
to India, and you are
not the same person.
In fact, you even
have a new name.
We're going to
call you as your--
the chiropractic
doctor, Donald Schnell.
But your experience
changed you completely,
and you started a
new life in 1997,
and you've written
a book about it.
And the book is called,
"The Initiation."
>> Yes.
>> OK.
>> Thank you.
>> And your name now
is Prema Baba Swamiji.
OK.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, that I'm sure
has much meaning,
and if you would explain to us
your name, Prema Baba Swamiji.
What does that mean?
>> Well, I'm still
called lots of things,
but Prema Baba Swamiji--
Prema is a Sanskrit word for--
it means love.
And Baba simply means
father, and Swamiji is
a title like rabbi or a priest.
It just means you're
in a sacred order.
>> OK.
And you were inducted
into this, initiated
into this sacred order.
Now, not everybody
gets to do that.
I mean, this was
something very special.
So it's not just because
you had been a devotee.
>> Well, we're not sure if it's
an IQ test I failed, you know,
or what.
But yeah, no, it was
quite a privilege.
It was an honor.
I was surprised.
I certainly felt an urge to go.
We had just-- my wife
Marilyn and I-- had just
finished completing a
tour, and we had just
landed into Los
Angeles from Australia,
and I felt a calling
from my childhood teacher
to go to India.
And I was determined to
get to India, and in fact,
did within 48 hours.
And as soon as I
arrived, he said
to me, what kept you so long?
Why weren't you here a year ago?
>> Telepathically, he'd been
inviting you for a year.
>> Uh-huh.
>> But you said your
childhood teacher,
so this is something that you
were special in that regard,
because from the time you were
little you have been spiritual,
metaphysical.
You have been also
Eastern oriented.
>> Right.
Well, he-- yes, very much so.
My childhood teacher used
to come to me in dreams,
and he used to wave his hand
and would make a candy for me
in the dreams.
And that's how I
would remember him.
I'd wake up and I'd feel
really very positive.
He was using positive
reinforcement instead of M&M's.
He was ahead of the group then.
>> Uh-huh.
>> And it was many years later
when I would meet him in India
and recognize him as
my childhood teacher.
>> And that was the Swami?
>> Nagananda.
But we're going to talk today
about Babaji, because Baba Ji--
and people will
need to be kind of--
an explanation, because Babaji
has been thousands of years,
perhaps 1,000
years on the Earth?
>> Well, there's-- we're not
really sure historically.
We have some clues.
It's in Indian
mythology, it's said
that he was
initiated by Krishna,
so we're talking at least
5,000 or 6,000 years of history
there.
>> OK.
>> We also know that he
started the Swami order,
that he initiated Shankar, the
founder of the Swami order,
and that's a good
3,000 years back.
So he's been on the
planet for quite a while.
>> OK.
Now, if people are not aware
of the philosophies of India,
this would be
surprising to them,
but we have sort of a lineage
of gurus and enlightened beings.
For example, the
Yogananda, and we
do-- you said that the
autobiography of a Yogananda
is where you first met Babaji.
>> Yes.
>> And he has--
well, tell us a little
bit about the mysteries,
how you can explain the
mysteries and the wonderments
of the gurus from the east?
>> Well, that's a good question.
And they-- I don't know
that they could be--
can be explained.
>> OK.
>> I think that there's some
things that are meant to be
beyond the rational mind.
They're not meant to
be put into a category
to allow us to stretch.
And in my experience
with the Swamis
and the various gurus
of India, they always
challenged all my
academic learning
and they took me into
regions beyond the mind,
and that's where the
growth came from.
And they moved me
into the heart,
and certainly as
an American male
I needed that, because I
was pretty left brained.
>> OK.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, and I think it's almost
as if someone had said, well,
you do a lot of show that
include some things about
India.
And I said, well, because there
is so much spirituality there
that we can incorporate,
and that people
who are on a
spiritual path often
find with yoga or
Ayurveda or a guru.
>> Absolutely.
America has its own
spiritual tradition
in the transcendentalist,
and they very much
match the Eastern teachings.
The problem is, we're
so focused on religion,
I think, in the
West that we don't
hear spirituality or
spiritual messages,
and therefore, when
we look to India,
for example, they're not so hung
up on the religious aspects.
And so you get
these spiritual gems
that are very universal
that apply to everybody.
And they go--
So it makes it
easier in that sense.
It's not that we don't
have them in the West.
It's just hard to define.
>> Well, and you--
you have a very
diverse background,
because I did say chiropractic
is one of your areas,
but you have been a soldier.
You have been a teacher.
You have-- well, I
read one paragraph
that went through
about 20 things
that you have done
in your lifetime.
So you have been very active.
Yeah.
In the martial arts,
but a lot of things
that actually were a part
of your spiritual path.
You were on a teacher in the--
of the Muktananda Sita yoga.
>> Right.
>> And that was an honor
early on that you got,
because you said
you were the only--
>> Well I was one of the
first five people to be with
Muktanada.
When he first came over, he
was brought by Werner Erhard,
and there were five people--
Richard Alpert, Ram
Dass, Werner Erhard.
I don't remember the others.
I was sort of the
water boy then.
And it was a very exciting time.
And he had that gift of using
his voice and music to also get
us out of our left brains.
It was very wonderful.
>> And sita yoga is
what that movement is?
>> Right.
>> But in Siddhis, Sita, that is
like some of the miracle kinds
of things that happened?
>> Right.
They're not related.
A Sita in that
tradition is one whose--
it means kua, a person
who's kind of gotten rid
of a lot of the ordinary things
of life-- the jealousies,
the tendency to judge,
and those sorts of things.
>> Uh-huh.
>> The Siddhis, it sounds
like a city like Minneapolis,
those are the powers that
some of the Swamis in India,
for example, are known for--
the healing powers or telepathic
powers, those sorts of things.
>> Well, your journey took you
this-- in 1997 back to India.
And we just kind of
moved up to some of that
why you had a background there.
You said you'd visited maybe
15 times from the '70s.
>> Right.
>> So you were in a
tradition of having a guru,
and you must have
been then ready,
and telepathically
you were called.
>> Yeah.
I was ready.
>> And your experience, then,
the story that you tell,
you mentioned the
petals from the lotus.
And tell me about that.
That's one of the
sections in your book.
>> Well, petals from the lotus
in the book at the initiation
describes my--
what happened to me after I
had been initiated by Babaji
into the monastic order.
And I was traveling
through India
and had the privilege
of meeting a healing
rabbi by the name of Nathan.
And in India, there's a small
group of the Jewish community
that Nathan was a part
of, and they've been there
for hundreds of years.
And he had that ability
of the laying on of hands.
And of course, I was very
surprised, you know, by that.
And I even would
ask him as a rabbi.
I was a new Swami, and
I said, well, you know,
do they teach you
this in rabbi school?
He said, well, not exactly.
But it was a gift
that had come to him,
and I felt very honored
to watch some of the--
firsthand some of the
miraculous healings
that were possible
from that, you
know, power of
laying on of hands.
>> It was also a time for
me when I got to reconnect
to my childhood teacher, and
let go of a lot of the world.
>> But you were able to actually
do healing work yourself,
and that's part of the result
of the initiation was that you
have then come into what would
be your purpose on the planet,
why you're here, and what
you're supposed to be doing.
>> Well, thank you
for saying that.
The healing work
is a gift, I feel,
that I carry from
my teacher Babaji,
and I feel much like a
soldier showing up for duty.
And I've witnessed
firsthand many healings that
have taken place from that
gift, and I feel very honored
to be a resource for those that
need that kind of a healing.
>> And the reason that you
were chosen to do this work?
>> Probably because
in Babaji's words,
he says you're a Balagundi.
I asked him, I said,
why me, Babaji?
He said, you're Balagundi.
And I said, well, what's that?
And inside I'm thinking, OK,
he means he's a vegetarian.
He's been meditating
for, you know, 10 years.
He hasn't earned a lot of money.
This is all good.
And he said, no, he says,
it's, you're a crazy,
because bala means crazy.
And he said, gundi is a rebel.
He said, do I have to tell you
what the two words together
mean?
He said, the West
needs a crazy rebel,
someone who is willing to
look at things differently
in order to make change to
bring us to a higher level.
And that was my gift.
>> So your assignment,
then, is basically,
because you are of the West but
you have studied the Eastern
philosophies, and you
have done your homework,
and you have been good.
You are a crazy rebel,
or something like that.
And then, you're actually
supposed to then come back
with a message that would make
a difference in people's lives
and on their spiritual path.
>> Well, I'm working
on that message.
We call it Prema.
I'm working on it with my
wife, and we're developing
a spiritual lifestyle.
The Eastern masters
that I was with
felt very much that we
need to get in shape again.
America needs to get fit, and
that physical fitness, as well
as mental and spiritual fitness.
And so we are working
very much in Prema.
This is what we call it, a
lifestyle spirituality that's
uniquely designed for
Westerners, but it's not--
that they can approach.
It's not to Eastern.
>> OK.
Well, what we're going to do
is, we will be taking a break.
But when we come
back, we have to talk
about the actual initiation,
because it's fascinating
what's happened, and
a little bit more
about these Siddhis, which
are like the miracles.
I think people find
this fascinating.
OK.
So if you will stay tuned,
we will be right back
with more of "The Initiation."
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]
And if you are just joining
us, I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill,
and we're talking with
Dr. Donald Schnell,
also Prema Baba Swamiji is the
other name that he was gifted,
and he was gifted that
during "The Initiation,"
and that is the name of the
book that he has written,
and that is what we will
be talking about today.
So "The Initiation,"
and I said, let's
talk about the actual
ceremony, because there
were some phenomenal things
that you experienced.
>> Oh, it was--
it's so hard for me
to talk about it.
When I left India, I couldn't
talk about it, in fact,
for three or four months, and--
>> Was it just too
personal, or was it--?
>> Oh, tears would come up and
I would just start, you know,
crying.
>> And did you-- was it so much
that you experienced that it
was just emotional
in the impact of it?
>> It wasn't just emotional.
It was certainly spiritual.
It was like a baptism.
It was very, very deep, and
there were many elements to it.
I don't know, of sitting around
the fire with the other monks,
and the horns and things.
It was a very picturesque.
I think one of the
moments that was--
well, I'll always remember,
was when Babaji said to me
to get a coal from the fire.
And I had had fire walking,
and I had, in fact,
had picked up coals
before, so I thought, well,
he's just confirming for me that
I had mastered that ability.
And so I reached down,
and I used my left hand,
because I didn't want
to-- if I did get burned.
>> Didn't want right
one, your favorite hand.
>> So I reached down and I
picked up a coal, and it stung,
and it was hot.
And Babaji asked me what
my favorite god was.
Well, there was a little--
asking the right person, there's
a lot a lot of choices there.
And I said to him, well,
Shiva, the first guru.
And he took his hand
and tapped my hand,
and he said, open your hand.
And when I opened it, there
was a beautiful, egg-shaped,
crystal-like object
that was just glowing.
And I touched it with my thumb.
And he said, don't touch.
And where I touched
it, it had indented.
It was soft.
I have that crystal now.
I don't have it with me, but it
is the indent is still in it.
The imprint is-- the thumbprint
is on it, and it's very hard.
It's very, very beautiful.
And there was no
coal in my hand.
There was some black ash
where the coal had been.
And that's one of
his little Siddhis.
>> Well, what
happened then to you,
the purpose of this initiation--
and you did go through this,
and you did meet with
Babaji, who again,
is thousands of years old
and still on the planet,
will appear occasionally
and so forth.
The purpose was for you to bring
this message back to the West.
Now, you and your lovely
wife, who we will mention,
it's Marilyn Diamond, who is
co-author of "Fit for Life"
and your soulmate partner.
>> Yes.
Very much.
>> And you together, now,
are supposed to do what?
Do you think will
help people move
on their spiritual path,
the result of your being
ordained into this order?
>> Well, I don't know that
people care about that one way
or the other really so much.
Mostly, I think as
individuals we care about what
can spirituality do for us.
How can it help
me with my family?
me with my career?
How will help me lose weight?
>> Yeah.
>> And Babaji in that
sense is very practical.
He's very old, but he's still
in a 24-year-old looking body.
He's very fit looking,
and extremely,
extremely, healthy,
very, very radiant.
And Marilyn brings
that technology,
and we've combined
it with what Babaji
has taught for immortality,
how to regenerate the body,
rejuvenate the body--
really Eastern secrets
that are not readily available.
And that's the work that
we're doing in Prema,
bringing that
technology to the West
so it'll help-- the
spirituality will help them
in a very practical way.
>> Well, a practical approach--
one of the things that you were
taught is called
inner breathing.
now the inner breathing
will do what for us?
And can you show us?
Can you teach that?
Can it be that simple
that you can show me now
how I might inner breathe?
>> Well, we could.
The inner breathing, the concept
behind the inner breathing,
is very much similar
to the understanding
that acupuncturists have
about our physical body.
They believe in
China that there's
some kind of energy
system inside of the body,
like an energy nerve
pathway almost.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Whether that's true
or not, we don't know.
We know that scientists have
measured at Yale University
a force field
around human beings
that seems to expand
when we're healthy
and shrink when we get cancer
or other kinds of illnesses.
Babaji's inner
breath is designed
to move this energy
in a way that furthers
our spiritual evolution.
In the very simplest way
to share it with you,
he just says find a
comfortable place sitting down,
because if you stand up
you might faint if you're
taking in too much air.
So just to kind of relax
and close your eyes,
and we'll do a
couple of breaths.
He says, let your eyes
be closed and relaxed,
and then bring in an
inhalation through your mouth,
long, slow, and deep, way down
to the base of your spine,
visualizing white
light coming in.
And then, as you exhale,
visualize a warm golden light
coming up your spine, and
let it flow out of your body.
And he says to repeat that
breath seven times a day.
>> Is it just that simple?
Seven times a day.
>> But with a strong intent and
focus that you're taking that
time for your
spiritual development.
You're moving this divine
energy that we all have.
>> Intention in focus.
OK.
Because breath is--
>> We all breathe.
>> In every culture, we know
that it is very important.
We also are going to speak
just about Prana and Kundalini,
because Prana is also
affected by the breathing.
>> Right.
>> OK.
And how would you define
for us, spiritually, Prana
and Kundalini?
>> Well that's-- the Prana in
the classical yogic definition
is any energy.
Light is Prana.
Electricity is
Prana, or the food
we digest that energy-- that
chemical energy it makes
is Prana.
Kundalini energy is that
unique part of Prana
that is our own individual,
spiritual core or essence.
And so in the yogic and
spiritual philosophies,
they believe that if we
breathe in such a way,
like we just did with
the inner breath,
we're stimulating the
Prana, the Kundalini
Prana, our spiritual energies,
to expand in our lives.
If we don't take the moment
to do that breathing,
it's not going to happen.
It's like brushing our teeth.
If we brush our teeth,
our teeth get cleaned.
If we want to expand
our spiritual core,
we take a moment and
breathe with intention,
and it'll expand.
It's common sense.
>> OK.
And so then, the Kundalini.
Now, we mentioned your wife,
and her spiritual name is Leela.
And Leela is an
important word to Babaji.
>> Babaji said to me, Prema Baba
Swamaji, you've got a laugh.
I'm too serious.
He knows that.
And Leela means play.
And very much in the
West, it's become--
this depression has become
a number one epidemic.
>> Yes.
>> And Illness.
>> Oh, it's amazing.
>> With two parent families,
the working that we're doing,
we focus so much on
achievement and work--
I think it's a carryover
from the '80s and the '90s--
that we really have,
in a way, forgotten
how to play and to become
like little children again.
That's not a new message, but
we've certainly forgotten that.
And Leela in our work in
Prema brings that message
to help us recover our
natural youthfulness.
That's where our regeneration
and rejuvenation lies.
It's in that inner child.
>> OK.
So that childlike part
of us just to play.
>> Yeah.
>> I like that.
Also, I wanted you to share
the power of chanting.
And you have your own
mantra that you have chosen,
and the mantra, and the purpose
of it, and the power of it.
Would you explain that?
And that's, Om-Prema-Om?
>> Om-Prema-Om.
Om-Prema-Om is a simple
device that allows us to--
it's a phrase that allows
us to focus on love.
And Om simply means,
it means truth.
It's related to the Hebrew word,
amen, which also means truth.
And so it's truth,
love, truth, love.
And love is truth.
And the way the monitor is used,
it's used in a meditative style
when you have 15, 20 minutes,
or even 5 minutes just
to sit down and
inwardly, by repeating
that sound, Om-Prema-Om,
what the Babaji says
is that those words are
blessed so that they
spark our natural love inside.
The Babaji is teaching us that
the soul, sweetness itself,
is love.
So when you say the word,
you bring up the image,
just like when you say
cat and you think of cat.
Prema was uniquely designed to
bring up our own divine love.
And so when we repeat that
mantra, Om-Prema-Om a little
each day, it's like
digging in a well
and bringing out some water.
We start to nourish
our flower within.
>> Mm-hmm.
And that meditation on
a daily basis, you said,
could be as little
as five minutes,
but you really recommend
about 20 minutes.
>> Well--
>> Of quiet time.
>> Babaji would love to see
us meditate for one minute,
you know?
And our Western scientists
are telling us, look,
we're overstressed.
Do it for 20 as a minimum.
And I know that the
reality is most people say,
another burden to do?
So Babaji is saying,
get your feet wet.
Try it for one minute.
Take a minute.
Sit down.
Go deep inside,
and do Om-Prema-Om.
>> Well, we thank you.
>> Thank you for
having me on your show.
It's been a privilege.
>> It has been a pleasure.
>> If you would like to be in
touch with Dr. Donald Schnell,
Prema Baba Swamaji, or us, we
always love to hear from you.
And stay tuned, too.
We have some parting thoughts.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]
Ah, So.
Living in balance in
mind, body, spirit.
We can do that when
East meets West.
There are gifts from both.
Until next time, I'm
Georgia Shatki-Hill.
May you be well,
happy, and peaceful.
[UPLIFTING MUSIC]